GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is on
assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Los
Angeles shuts down the nation's
second largest school district
after an e-mail threat
targeting students.
Also ahead: Baltimore is on high
alert, as the jury is sent back
after declaring a deadlock
in the Freddie Gray case.
Plus: Terrorism and safety
concerns take center stage at
tonight's Republican
presidential
debate.
And Miles O'Brien gets a reality
check on solar and wind energy.
DONALD SADOWAY, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology: The
issue is that we don't have
a battery technology that can
meet the rigorous performance
requirements of the grid,
namely,
super low-cost and super
long service lifetime.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Public schools
across Los Angeles went dark
today, shuttered by the fear of
a terror strike. It came in the
form of an e-mail that warned of
mass violence.
The threat brought the Los
Angeles Unified School District,
covering 600 square miles,
to a halt. All 1,200 schools
were shut down before classes
started for the day. Many of
the 640,000 students were forced
to turn around and head home.
And Superintendent Ramon
Cortines hastily convened a news
conference.
RAMON CORTINES, Superintendent,
Los Angeles Unified School
District: I think it is
important
that I take the precaution based
on what has happened recently
and what has happened in
the past.
GWEN IFILL: Cortines was
referring to the rampage two
weeks ago in nearby San
Bernardino,
where a married couple, Syed
Farook and Tashfeen Malik,
killed 14 people at a holiday
party.
As L.A. police fanned out and
began checking schools today,
officials said the e-mailed
threat came from Germany and
mentioned everything from guns
to bombs to nerve gas.
For many parents,
it was unnerving.
MAN: Well, if it's real,
watching from what happened in
San Bernardino, that's pretty
close to home. And now this one
here, even closer, that's kind
of scary.
WOMAN: Confusion, chaos,
nervousness. You're not certain
of what's going on, what's
entailed
behind it. So, there's a lot of
different emotions behind that.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, officials
in New York City said they
received a similar, if not
the same, message. They
discounted it as a hoax,
possibly based on a television
show.
WILLIAM BRATTON, New York City
Police Commissioner: The
language in the e-mail would
lead us to
believe that this is not a
jihadist initiative, for
example, that Allah wasn't
spelled with
a capital A. That would be
incredible to think that any
jihadist wouldn't spell Allah
with
a capital A.
I think the initiator, the
instigator of the threat may be
a "Homeland" fan, basically
watching "Homeland" episodes,
that it mirrors a lot of recent
episodes on "Homeland."
GWEN IFILL: Moreover, Mayor Bill
de Blasio argued it's vital to
keep schools open and
not overreact.
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor of New
York: It's very important to
realize there are people
who want us to fundamentally
change our lifestyle and our
values, and we will never give
in
to that.
GWEN IFILL: As the hours ticked
by, Los Angeles Mayor Eric
Garcetti pushed back at
criticism
it was wrong to
close L.A. schools.
ERIC GARCETTI (D), Mayor of Los
Angeles: We will continue to
hope that this is nothing
and that our children can be
back at school tomorrow. But, as
a parent and as a mayor,
certainly, I am here to support
this school district as it seeks
our help to ensure that
we can look at each one of these
campuses and make sure that they
are safe for all of
our children.
GWEN IFILL: The search and the
investigation continued into the
evening, assisted by the
FBI.
The White House said it wouldn't
second guess the decision in Los
Angeles, but a congressman
from the area, Adam Schiff, said
it now appears the threat was
indeed a hoax.
In the day's other news, the
United Nations' nuclear agency
formally ended a decade-long
probe into Iran's nuclear
program. But, in Vienna, the
head of the International Atomic
Energy Agency
said there's no sign the
work has continued.
YUKIYA AMANO, Director General,
International Atomic Energy
Agency: The agency has no
credible
indications of activities in
Iran relevant to the development
of nuclear explosive devices
after 2009, nor has the agency
found any credible indications
of the diversion of nuclear
material
in connection with the possible
military dimensions to Iran's
nuclear program.
GWEN IFILL: The end of the
investigation clears the way for
implementing a July deal that
the U.S. and other powers
reached with Iran. It calls for
curbing the nuclear program in
exchange for relief from
economic sanctions.
Human rights activists in
Nigeria are accusing the
country's military of carrying
out a massacre
of hundreds of Shiite Muslims.
They say it happened over the
weekend in the city of Zaria.
The army says the Shiites
attacked a military convoy.
Protests over the incident broke
out
today in another city. A Shiite
spokesman says police fired on
the crowd and killed
at least three people.
Defense Secretary Ash Carter
called for the rest of the world
today to ramp up military
efforts against the Islamic
State group. Carter spoke to
U.S. and other troops stationed
in
Southern Turkey. They're taking
part in the air campaign against
ISIS targets in Iraq
and Syria.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: We really are looking
for the rest of the world
to step up. America is stepping
up. We need our allies and
partners around the world to
step up and do more. And that's
true in Europe. It's true in the
Gulf. It's true -- by Europe,
I mean, all of NATO,
including Turkey.
GWEN IFILL: Carter also called
for Turkey to seal off the rest
of its border against
ISIS smuggling. And Turkey today
joined a new 34-nation Islamic
military alliance battling
terrorism. It's led by Saudi
Arabia, but doesn't include
Iran, Iraq or Syria.
In Yemen, a week-long cease-fire
took effect today between Shiite
rebels and government
forces backed by the Saudis and
other Arab states. Even so,
security officials said shelling
and ground clashes continued in
places. The truce was timed to
coincide with U.N.-brokered
peace talks in Geneva. A special
U.N. envoy urged both sides to
end the war.
ISMAIL OULD CHEIKH AHMED, U.N.
Special Envoy for Yemen (through
translator): Today, you
are the decision makers, and
before you lies a historic
responsibility. Are you going to
abandon Yemen and its people and
lead the country into further
violence and slaughter?
Or are you going to put Yemen
first and ensure the people of
Yemen can live the dignified
life they deserve? You are
writing the history of modern
Yemen, and you alone have the
power
to overturn the situation.
GWEN IFILL: The World Health
Organization says the warring
factions have promised to
allow unconditional movement of
supplies and medical teams
during the cease-fire.
Secretary of State John Kerry
reports progress on plans for
Syrian peace talks this week.
Kerry met with Russian President
Vladimir Putin in Moscow today
and said they found
common ground on which Syrian
opposition groups to include in
the talks. Russia backs the
Syrian government, while the
U.S. supports moderate rebels.
Back in this country,
congressional negotiators worked
to finish sweeping tax and
spending
bills to fund the government for
the rest of the fiscal year. If
they agree, the trillion-dollar
package would also lift a
40-year-old ban on U.S. oil
exports, as Republicans want.
And it would renew tax credits
for producers of renewable
energy, something Democrats have
asked for.
The Republican governor of Texas
has ordered National Guard
troops to remain at the state's
border with Mexico. Their
mission was supposed to end this
month, but Governor Greg Abbott
says more than 10,000 children
crossed into the U.S. in October
and November without parents.
That's double the
number from a year ago.
And Wall Street gained ground
for a second day. The Dow Jones
industrial average was
up 156 points to close near
17525. The Nasdaq rose 43
points, and the S&P 500 added
21.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a new focus on terrorism as the
GOP debates; Baltimore's
Freddie Gray case in the hands
of the jury; a congressional
crackdown on financial advisers;
and much more.
Tonight marks the fifth time
Republican candidates will face
off on the debate stage, but it
will be the first time they have
met since the attacks in Paris
and San Bernardino.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: National
security, it's now the dominant
theme for 2016 in speech after
speech.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We don't feel safe
anymore.
LISA DESJARDINS: From one
news conference to the next.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate: We are,
today, in a time of war.
LISA DESJARDINS: Again and
again in TV appearances.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: They're
afraid of what they're reading
in
the press.
LISA DESJARDINS: The attacks on
Paris and San Bernardino have
fueled the new urgency.
A new NBC News/Wall Street
Journal poll lists national
security as the clear number one
priority of all voters; 40
percent chose it. But the number
was even greater for Republican
voters; 58 percent said fighting
terror should be government's
top priority.
The candidates have been quick
to react, and a campaign that
was focused on outsiders is
now highlighting the experience
of some establishment
candidates, putting those with
less foreign
policy background
on their heels.
Former front-runner Ben Carson
starting losing support after
one of his advisers told The
New York Times that the
neurosurgeon has a weak grasp on
foreign policy. Then today,
Carson, trying to regain
momentum, released a plan to
protect America. But look at
point
number seven: a call to
investigate the Council on
American-Islamic Relations,
known as CAIR,
as a -- quote --
"supporter of terrorism."
The group, a leading advocate
for American Muslims, fired back
in a statement, calling
Carson's remarks Islamophobia.
With Carson struggling, Senators
Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, more
steeped in security
policy, are gaining with
conservatives. One sits on the
Senate's Judiciary and Armed
Services
Committees, the other on the
Foreign Relations and
Intelligence panels. Now the two
are turning
their fire on each other.
Cruz, who's surging in the
polls, has tried to cast Rubio
as authoritarian.
SEN. TED CRUZ: When it comes to
foreign policy, he wants as much
power in Washington as possible.
And he has agreed with John
McCain, and Lindsey Graham, and,
for that matter, Hillary Clinton
and Barack Obama, that we should
keep sticking our nose in
foreign entanglements where the
results of their policies
has made America less safe.
LISA DESJARDINS: Rubio, in turn,
has cast Cruz as bad for the
military.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Given the
choice between neo-isolationism
or the defense of our country,
he's chosen neo-isolationism,
whether it's weakening our
intelligence-gathering
capabilities,
or voting against the defense
bills, or voting against for a
budget that substantially
reduces
our defense spending.
Now, these are facts.
LISA DESJARDINS: While they duke
it out, New Jersey Governor
Chris Christie is also on
the rise, stressing his time
as a federal prosecutor.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate: I was,
you know, in charge of having to
make
many of those decisions in my
office for seven years as U.S.
attorney.
LISA DESJARDINS: The new
security focus, of course, also
sparked Donald Trump's call to
block Muslims from entering the
country, and that prompted new
criticism from some of his
opponents, like Ohio
Governor John Kasich.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate: Look,
people don't buy this.
LISA DESJARDINS: And former
Florida Governor Jeb Bush.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: There's no evidence
that he's serious about any
policy
proposal he's laid out.
LISA DESJARDINS: So far, though,
the national security debate has
seemed to boost, not bruise,
the Republican front-runner.
DONALD TRUMP: We have to get
smart. We have to get tough. We
have to be vigilant. We have
to be vigilant. We
have no choice.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile,
Democrats are trying not to let
Republicans take ownership
of the issue. In Minneapolis
today, Hillary Clinton outlined
her plan for fighting terrorism
in the U.S.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: The
threat we face is daunting, but
America
has overcome big challenges many
times before. Throughout our
history, we have stared into
the face of evil and
refused to blink.
LISA DESJARDINS: And, tellingly,
all of the candidates running
for president now stress
they're running to be
commander in chief as well.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: In Baltimore,
residents and officials are
anxiously awaiting a verdict in
the first
trial in the death of Freddie
Gray. It has exposed deep cracks
in the city's criminal
justice system, race relations
and economic divide. The case
has its roots in the April
arrest of 25-year-old Freddie
Gray and his death a week later.
After police detained him on a
North Baltimore street, Gray was
handcuffed and loaded into
a police van. Either then, or
during the subsequent
multiple-stop 45-minute ride, he
suffered
what would become a
fatal spinal injury.
PROTESTER: Every day, every day!
PROTESTERS: We will
fight for Freddie Gray!
GWEN IFILL: Gray's death
galvanized large protests and
neighborhood unrest, despite
appeals for calm by his
mother and community leaders.
GLORIA DARDEN, Mother of Freddie
Gray: I want you all to get
justice for my son, but don't
do it like this here. Don't tear
up the whole city, man. Just for
him? It's wrong.
GWEN IFILL: Eventually,
thousands of National Guard
troops were called in to
stabilize the
city and enforce a week-long
curfew. State's attorney Marilyn
Mosby charged six police
officers in May, accusing them
of failing to do anything to
prevent Gray's death.
MARILYN MOSBY, Baltimore State's
Attorney: At no point was he
secured by a seat belt
while in the wagon, contrary to
a BPD general order. Despite Mr.
Gray's seriously deteriorating
medical condition, no medical
assistance was rendered or
summoned for Mr. Gray at that
time by any officer.
GWEN IFILL: Officer William
Porter, the first of the six to
go to court, stands accused
of manslaughter, assault,
reckless endangerment and
misconduct.
During his two-week trial,
prosecutors blamed him for
failing to buckle Gray into a
seat
belt, and for not calling for an
ambulance. They told the jury of
seven women and five
men that Porter's inaction
effectively turned the police
van into a casket on wheels.
In his own defense, Porter said,
when he checked, Gray didn't
seem injured, and his lawyers
argued the vehicle's driver, not
Porter, was supposed to ensure
Gray was belted in. Now
police are braced for potential
trouble after a verdict, and the
head of the city's public
schools has issued a letter to
the community warning students
that, "Walkouts, vandalism,
civil disorder and any form of
violence are not acceptable."
Right now, the larger issue is
the potential for a mistrial.
This afternoon, jurors sent
out a note saying they are
deadlocked. Judge Barry Williams
ordered them to continue
deliberating.
That jury has gone home now
after a second day of
deliberations without reaching a
verdict.
Juliet Linderman covers
Baltimore for the Associated
Press. She has been at the
trial,
and she joins me now.
Of course, we have to talk first
about this deadlock. What do we
know about it, Juliet?
JULIET LINDERMAN, Associated
Press: So, the jury went home
for the day around 5:30, and
they had been deliberating for
two days. This was the second
day. They had been deliberating
for about nine hours when they
sent the judge a note saying
that they were deadlocked.
It's unclear on what charges
they are deadlocked or how many
jurors are disagreeing, but the
judge did send them back into
the jury room and said they
should continue deliberations.
So, they will continue
tomorrow morning.
GWEN IFILL: Has the jury
signaled in any other way, sent
out any other queries about what
it is that they're curious
about, what -- that they could
reach a deadlock kind of quickly
after only two days
of deliberation?
JULIET LINDERMAN: Sure. Sure.
Well, they did request
transcripts of William Porter's
testimony that he gave to
investigators
on April 17. They also wanted
the police transmission tapes.
The judge denied their request
for
transcripts, but the jurors will
be able to view those tapes.
The jurors have also asked for
clarification on certain terms,
particularly in regards
to the misconduct in office
charge. They wanted
clarification on, you know, what
an evil motive
might mean, so there's a chance
that they are mulling over that
charge, but beyond that
would be speculative. We really
don't know what they're doing so
far.
GWEN IFILL: What does an evil
motive mean in this legal case?
JULIET LINDERMAN: Sure.
Well, there are four charges
that William Porter faces. And
that's reckless endangerment,
which is basically a wanton
disregard for human life, that
William Porter's inaction
caused the risk of injury and
death. So the manslaughter
charge stems from Freddie Gray's
death and the assault charge
stems from his injuries.
Misconduct in office is a little
bit more complicated, because
jurors are going to have
to determine whether William
Porter acted in a corrupt manner
and whether he, you know,
failed in his duty as an
officer, knowingly failed in
that duty. So it's a bit more
complicated,
and jurors are probably really
considering that charge very
carefully.
GWEN IFILL: And I gather there
has been no lack of drama in the
courtroom, including
the putting down of a seat belt
on the table to demonstrate to
the jurors.
JULIET LINDERMAN: Sure.
GWEN IFILL: Tell me about that.
JULIET LINDERMAN: Absolutely.
Prosecutors -- the prosecutor,
Jan Bledsoe, she did dangle the
bloody set belt in front
of jurors. They say that William
Porter was criminally negligent
when he failed to seat
belt Freddie Gray in the back of
the van, and they wanted to
convey to jurors that that
was an intentional decision that
he made, and that he ignored
Freddie Gray when he was
asking for medical attention.
Of course, William Porter told
jurors that he didn't think that
Freddie Gray was injured,
that he was showing no signs of
distress at all, and that he
told his supervisor that
he needed to go to the hospital.
So that's basically how it's
playing out right now. And
jurors are going to have to
decide
what to believe. William Porter
did take the stand in his own
defense for more than four
hours. And during closing
arguments, prosecutors portrayed
William Porter as perhaps not
telling
the truth. And so jurors are
going to have to decide whether
they believed his testimony.
GWEN IFILL: Whether he
was credible or not.
But remind us. Since there are
six people charged, what exact
role was William Porter?
He wasn't the driver of the van.
JULIET LINDERMAN: He wasn't
the driver of the van.
So, William Porter basically
responded to a call for help. He
was present at five of
the six stops that the transport
vehicle carrying Freddie Gray
made on its almost 45-minute
trip from the site of the arrest
at the Gilmor Homes in West
Baltimore to the Western
District
police station, where Freddie
Gray arrived unresponsive.
Basically, the stop that is
really at the center of this
trial is the van's fourth stop
at Druid Hill and Dolphin, when
William Porter checked on Gray,
and he picked Gray up from
the floor of the transport van,
where he was lying on his
stomach with his legs shackled
and his wrists restrained in
flexi-cuffs, and he put him on a
bench, upright onto a
bench.
And in Porter's words, he told
the van driver, Caesar Goodson,
whose trial is coming up early
next year, that Mr. Gray needed
to go to a hospital. But
prosecutors say that Porter
should have called for a medic
immediately after Gray indicated
that he was in any sort
of distress.
GWEN IFILL: So, OK, let's talk
about what effect this has had
on the city of Baltimore.
We know what the immediate
impact was right after -- just
before the charges were brought,
right after the charges were
brought. But what kind of --
where is the city tonight,
I guess?
JULIET LINDERMAN: Sure.
Well, the city is absolutely
bracing for a verdict. Police --
there is a police presence
in Baltimore. There was a
presence in Baltimore today.
Police officers from Baltimore
and
from surrounding jurisdictions
were seen staging around the
city.
There is a crowd of protesters
that had gathered outside of the
courthouse this evening. There
are demonstrations planned for
whenever the verdict does come
down and also for the following
day.
So I think the city can
absolutely expect
demonstrations. And the police
department
is preparing for any sort of
civil unrest that we might see
in the coming days.
GWEN IFILL: Are any of the
people who are organizing these
protests are counseling peaceful
protests over violent protests?
JULIET LINDERMAN: Absolutely.
As we -- you discussed before,
the public school CEO sent a
letter to all families,
public school families,
basically saying that civil
disobedience was not going to be
tolerated,
that there would be
consequences. And that included
student walkouts.
There have been peaceful
protests. And students have
played a large role in those
protests.
In October, students -- students
staged a sit-in, in city hall
that went late into the
night. Some were arrested.
Several students were arrested,
but it was a peaceful
demonstration.
And so the students are urging
for that kind of peaceful civil
disobedience, I think, in
the coming days. And the mayor
has also been outspoken, urging
residents to remain peaceful
as we come into the verdict
whenever it comes down.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Well, I know that you will be in
the courtroom watching for that.
Juliet Linderman of the
Associated Press, thank you.
JULIET LINDERMAN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
the media covers racial issues;
a reality check of renewable
energy; and actor Bill
Murray's love of poetry.
But, first, a battle is brewing
over proposed rules about the
advice that financial advisers
can give their customers.
The fight is one of several big
dividing lines this week on
Capitol Hill, and it's spilled
into the spending standoff as
well. The deadline to pass a new
spending bill is tomorrow.
William Brangham has been
speaking with several of the key
players as we get closer to the
deadline, and he joins me now.
So, this has finally percolated
its way to Congress, but what is
at the root of this
dispute, William?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The root of
this dispute is that the
Department of Labor wants to
change
the rules governing
retirement advisers.
And these are people you go to
if you need help with your
401(k) or rolling over your
IRA, things like that. And the
Department of Labor wants to
change it so that all these
advisers have to have what is
called the best interests of
their client at heart.
Now, many of us might think,
well, doesn't my adviser already
have my best interest at
heart? And most of them do, but
not all of them, and not all of
them are legally required
to do so.
So, that can sometimes mean that
you might get sold a plan that
has a lot of higher fees
that is maybe not the best plan
for your retirement future. And
so the Department of Labor wants
to say, OK, put your clients'
interests ahead of you, ahead of
your own across the board.
And, yesterday, I talked to the
labor secretary, Thomas Perez,
and here's what he had to say
about this.
THOMAS PEREZ, U.S. Secretary of
Labor: This is not a case of
people with malice in their
heart who are trying to screw
people. This is a case about a
system that's structurally
flawed.
The incentives are misaligned.
Under the current standard,
which is a so-called suitability
standard, I can have four or
five different products that are
so-called suitable for you.
And what happens? Well, the
product that generates the most
commission for the salesperson
is
the product that
invariably gets sold.
And so the consumer loses,
and the salesperson wins.
GWEN IFILL: So, William, the
consumer loses and the
salesperson wins, as Secretary
Perez
says. How much money are
we talking about here?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The White
House estimates that $17 billion
is lost every single year
by advisers who are getting what
they call this conflicted
advice, where you're sold
something where the fees are
higher than they should be or
that is just not the optimal
plan for you.
And the complicated issue here
is that there is a dizzying
array of retirement options
out there. And it's very
difficult for people to know
where to turn, so naturally they
seek
advice.
One of the advocates that I
spoke with likened this to when
you're driving down the road
in your car, and, all of a
sudden, you hear a big bang
coming out of your engine. You
take it to one mechanic and he
says, that's $1,500 because you
have got to replace your
transmission.
Take it to another mechanic, he
says, oh, it's $1.99 for a spark
plug.
Unless you're an auto mechanic,
you just don't know, well, who's
right and who's wrong. And
some of the advocates argue that
financial advice is the same
way.
Dennis Kelleher, the CEO of an
advocacy group called Better
Markets, put this way.
DENNIS KELLEHER, President,
Better Markets: So, it's
perfectly reasonable to get
advice
for such complex matters. The
problem is that it's not
transparent.
You -- the person doesn't know,
what are the 20 or 30 different
types of products available?
What are the fees? How do they
perform over time? And am I
getting a high-cost product
that's going to perform poorly
or a low-cost product that will
perform better? And you
are never going to know because
you never see the alternative.
GWEN IFILL: The industry
obviously is not taking this
lying down. They are going to
continue to fight this, and
they're spending a lot of money
on it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The industry
has spent already millions of
dollars trying to torpedo these
rules.
They put a rider in the current
omnibus spending bill that is
going to try to eliminate the
ability of the Department of
Labor to introduce this, and
they are arguing that these
rules
are unnecessary, that they're
going to overly burden the
industry, people will not get
the
advice that they need, and that
this is just an unnecessary set
of rules.
GWEN IFILL: You talked to Kevin
Mayeux, the National Association
of Insurance and Financial
Advisers spokesmen. Let's
hear what he said.
KEVIN MAYEUX, National
Association of Insurance and
Financial Advisers: Financial
advisers
that are successful are
constantly acting in the best
interests of their clients,
because,
if they weren't, they wouldn't
be in business anymore.
There is already ample
opportunity to discipline bad
actors. And the cost of the
complying
with a complex federal
regulation that is 1,000 pages
in length is just going to make
it prohibitive for companies to
put their advisers on the street
to help clients and
for advisers to be able to
access clients to give them an
array of options from which
they can choose.
GWEN IFILL: When the industry
talks about the cost of
compliance, how burdensome are
they saying these
regulations would be?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They say that
they are very burdensome. They
say this is 1,000 pages of
regulations, and maybe big firms
can handle the compliance costs
of that, but smaller
advisers can't, and that some of
those advisers might look at
this and say, I'm getting out
of this business.
GWEN IFILL: So, what do you if
you're something who is just
depending on your financial
adviser
to handle your nest egg?
What do you do now?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, if you
really want to know whether or
not they're looking out
for you, you can ask.
It's an awkward conversation,
but you can literally say to
your adviser, do you have
the legal obligation to look out
for my best interests? Now, if
they say, I don't have
the legal obligation, it doesn't
mean they are going to try
swindle you necessarily.
But if they say they do have
that obligation, then chances
are you can be more comfortable
with that. But if you already
have a plan, and you're
wondering, was this a good plan,
did I get sold a bill of goods,
you can take it to someone like
a certified financial planner
or a registered financial
adviser, people who do have that
legal obligation, and say,
review this for me. Tell me, is
this a good plan for me or not?
GWEN IFILL: William Brangham,
thank you very much.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Newsrooms across the
country have long been accused
of failing to represent
the communities they cover. And
as racial concerns continue to
rise to the surface across
the country, who is
telling those stories?
That's the question being raised
by one group of journalists, and
the topic of the latest
installment of special
correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault's solutions-based
series "Race
Matters."
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Race
nowadays is all over the news
media, not at least coverage
of protests in places like
Ferguson, Baltimore and New
York.
But the media are also taking
hits from critics, especially
those who complain of a lack of
fairness or consistency, again,
when it comes to issues
involving race.
Richard Prince is a journalist
focusing on race and diversity
in his thrice-weekly online
column "Journalism." It runs on
the Web site of the Maynard
Institute, the sponsoring
organization
started in the wake of the
mid-'60s riots and aimed at
trying to correct the lack of
stories relating to
race and diversity.
We met Prince at the Newseum, a
Washington, D.C.-based
institution that's home to
examples
of media committed to fairness
and balance in their coverage of
race and diversity.
Richard Prince, thank
you for joining us.
RICHARD PRINCE, The Maynard
Institute: So glad to be here.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Your
column carries a lot of articles
about journalists who are
themselves complaining about
fairness in media. What's your
take on the criticisms of media
and their issues?
RICHARD PRINCE: I don't think
there is any more criticism of
the media than there has
ever been. It's just that we get
to hear it now and see it
instantaneously.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
you're a little younger than I
am, but I remember the
presidential
commission that reported on the
riots in the mid-'60s. And it
blamed the media for not
having enough people or any
people at all in the
neighborhoods where people were
simmering
over few -- lack of jobs, poor
education, no opportunities.
And it said that you have got to
get more African-Americans or
people from those neighborhoods
in the media.
What happened?
RICHARD PRINCE: Well, since that
time, there was a great push, as
you say, after the Kerner
Commission report of 1968.
All through the '70s, diversity
was a great buzzword. And then
in the '80s, you started
getting a backlash to
affirmative action and that kind
of thing. Then you had the
recession,
which meant that newsrooms had
to sort of tighten up and not
hire as many people, start
laying people off, and the
Internet, which made things
worse, because it took away a
lot of the revenue base of
newspapers particularly.
And so diversity sort of went
off the table. And so now we are
sort of in a stagnant situation,
where the -- I think of
newspapers, for example, and
online outlets. We have 13
percent of
the newsrooms now are people of
color, whereas the population
has a third people of color.
So there's a big gap there.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So there
continues to be this black-white
divide in racial discourse.
How much of that is the
fault of the media?
RICHARD PRINCE: Well, of course,
one of the purposes of the news
media, and particularly
of newspapers and local
television stations, is to have
different parts of the community
talking with each other.
I think there are a lot of news
organizations that do take that
role very seriously, less
so with others. It also depends
on the staff you have and how
aggressive they are in demanding
of their editors that
certain things be covered.
And, logically, the more people
you have of color there, or
good-thinking people who are
not of color, the better
the coverage will be.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But are
we losing people of color as the
-- as you have the
consolidation of media?
RICHARD PRINCE: Yes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: And
what's going to be the result of
that?
RICHARD PRINCE: Well, because of
all the layoffs and buyouts and
everything, that
African-American
journalists particularly have
been harder-hit than others.
But, you know, covering people
of color and communities of
color is not just the
responsibility
of the journalists of color on
the staff. It's everyone's
responsibility. So, if you
have people, white people, white
journalists who care about this
issue, then it will get
done.
And we have -- saw a good
example of that, and when a
crisis happens such as in
Charleston,
South Carolina, with the church
shooting, where that newspaper
there had actually decreased
in diversity, but they still did
a good job, according to most
estimates, because they
cared and they put their
nose to the grindstone.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But do
you think there should be a
specific race beat? And, if so,
who should -- who
should have it?
(LAUGHTER)
RICHARD PRINCE: You can have a
specific race beat, but you can
also make it everyone's
responsibility.
And at another conference, Paul
Cheung, who is the head of the
Asian American Journalists
Association, he recommended
that, when you do these race
projects, you have -- you make
them integrated, so that the
white journalists learn a lot
about what's going on in the
communities
of color, and they can learn
also from their colleagues of
color.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, when
you look at the landscape of
media today, how hopeful
are you that the media are going
to live up to your hopes and the
hopes of those journalists
of color and others who are
writing to you and complaining
that the media are not doing
their job?
RICHARD PRINCE: Right.
Well, I think that there is just
too much indifference to the
whole idea of diversity.
Yes, we will do it if we get to
it. I mean, the number of
newsrooms in this country that
have no people of color at all
in them is appalling. And the
fact that it's allowed
to remain, I think
is scandalous.
But we're fighting apathy,
indifference and competing
interests. And people are
saying,
look, I have to worry about the
bottom line. And they don't
realize that the bottom line
is tied to the changing -- our
changing country that's becoming
browner and browner. And that's
where your potential
customers are.
And so you better learn how to
relate to them if you want to
stay in business.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But
after the Kerner Commission
report...
RICHARD PRINCE: Yes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: ...
newspapers, and then there were
only three networks, invested
in educating African-Americans
to live up to what the Kerner
Commission said. You need
more people from
those communities.
RICHARD PRINCE: Yes. Yes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Anybody doing that today?
RICHARD PRINCE: There are
internship programs at a lot of
the networks. Even FOX News has
an apprenticeship program for
people of color, something that
might surprise folks who think
of FOX News in a different way.
(LAUGHTER)
RICHARD PRINCE: And FOX News
also has a separate Web site,
FOX News Latino, to reach
Hispanics,
English-speaking Hispanics. And
that was just praised and got an
award from the National
Association of
Hispanic Journalists.
So, when -- when people see that
-- the business imperative, as
well as everything else, I
mean, I think that's
when you get action.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
you're not as pessimistic as
some of the people you report
on, but, still, you say there
are things that need to be done.
So what are the solutions?
RICHARD PRINCE: There are a
lot of other answers, too.
Like, the American Society of
News Editors has a program where
they go out into communities
and they interact with community
folks and they give them a
chance to talk to the media.
And there's a lot of
exchanges of ideas there.
The University of Missouri,
Mizzou, just said they were
going to have diversity -- a
diversity
initiative required for all
students, faculty members and
staff members. This creates a
climate so that, when people
actually do enter the work
force, they will be more aware
of
the need for inclusiveness and
the need for covering what needs
to be covered.
There are a lot of solutions
that people are trying. And, as
people say, if one thing doesn't
work, then you just
try something else.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Richard Prince, thank you.
RICHARD PRINCE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The historic climate
change accord in Paris is
expected to give a further boost
to wind, solar and other forms
of energy that are less
dependent on fossil fuels that
cause
greenhouse gases.
Some observers think it will
change the business model for
energy in the decades to come.
But when it comes to renewable
energy, there's a crucial
technological gap that is no
small
hurdle.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien has our report.
MILES O'BRIEN: A hundred miles
north of Los Angeles, in
Tehachapi, California, the wind
can be a bountiful resource,
but, unfortunately, not at the
right time. It blows hardest at
night, spooling up these wind
turbines to their peak output,
when the demand for electricity
is at it lowest.
DOUG KIM, Southern California
Edison: So, matching the output
of wind to when customers
really need it, that's certainly
one of the things that we're
looking at with this system
that you see here, because
you can store energy.
MILES O'BRIEN: Doug Kim is the
director of advanced technology
for Southern California
Edison. The utility built this
eight megawatt lithium-ion
battery facility, designed to
store electricity generated
by the turbines.
DOUG KIM: We can certainly use
this for an example, when the
wind blows during the nighttime,
capture that energy during the
nighttime and then use it during
the daytime, when the demand
is high.
MILES O'BRIEN: The batteries,
stacked in racks here, are
equivalent to about 2,000
electric
cars. It is the start of
Edison's effort to meet a
state-mandated requirement to
add 580
megawatts of energy storage
into the grid by 2020.
It's part of a big push to
invent ways to practically store
huge amounts of electricity,
so that renewables so can become
a more than fringe players on
the grid.
DONALD SADOWAY, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology: If we
don't treat the intermittency
of renewables, they're --
they're not really a solution.
MILES O'BRIEN: Electrochemist
Donald Sadoway is a professor at
MIT. He says lithium-ion
batteries are not the answer;
they pose a serious fire risk,
and, as any laptop and
cell phone user knows, their
performance degrades fast as a
speeding Tesla. In short, they
are
way too expensive and
impractical for widespread usage
on the grid.
But what are the alternatives?
DONALD SADOWAY: The issue is
that we don't have a battery
technology that can meet the
rigorous performance
requirements of the grid,
namely, super low-cost and super
long service
lifetime.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Sadoway has
spent 30 years working in
electrometallurgy. So, no
surprise
that is where he found his
inspiration, specifically in the
aluminum smelting process.
DONALD SADOWAY: So, an aluminum
smelter makes metal from dirt
for less than 50 cents a pound
and consumes huge quantities of
electricity. And I looked at
that and thought, man, if
I could take that thing and
teach it not to consume
electricity, but to store
electricity
and then to give it back on
demand, I know, at the end of
the day, it's going to be cheap.
MILES O'BRIEN: That was 10 years
ago. Today, Dr. Sadoway is on
the cusp of bringing a novel
liquid battery to market through
a startup he founded called
Ambri.
DONALD SADOWAY: OK. So,
let's draw the battery.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Sadoway gave
me a chalk talk on how his
battery works. It is layered
like a parfait, with a
low-density liquid metal at the
top, a high-density liquid metal
at the bottom, and
molten salt in between.
DONALD SADOWAY: And the way the
battery works is the metal on
the top wants to form a solution
with the metal on the
bottom. We call it alloy.
MILES O'BRIEN: That interaction
creates a flow of ions,
electrical current. As it
discharges,
the top layer gets thinner and
thinner. When the sun is shining
on solar photovoltaic panels
or the wind is spinning
turbines, the process is
reversed.
DONALD SADOWAY: It reconstitutes
itself every time that it
recharges, which means that,
unlike other batteries, which
will reduce their run time with
use, our battery just
keeps on running. Show me
another battery that can do
that.
MILES O'BRIEN: Actually, it
might be just few miles down
Massachusetts Avenue in a lab
at Harvard.
MICHAEL AZIZ, Harvard
University: We took one of these
and we charged and discharged
it 700 times -- and if you think
about doing that once a day,
that's two years -- without
any real sign of degradation
of the molecules.
MILES O'BRIEN: Engineering
professor Michael Aziz is
developing a so-called flow
battery.
Flow batteries consist of two
separate tanks filled with
chemicals, one negative, one
positive.
The chemicals are pumped past
each other into the battery.
When wind turbines or solar
panels are generating power,
they charge the battery, pulling
electrons
from the positive, and pushing
them into the negative. When the
battery is turned on, the
flow of electrons reverses,
generating electricity.
MICHAEL AZIZ: The advantage of a
flow battery is, if you want
more energy, you just have
bigger tanks of chemicals. And
that's possibly a much cheaper
way of getting the high amounts
of energy than stacking up
banks and banks of batteries.
MILES O'BRIEN: Flow batteries
powered by a rare, expensive
metal called vanadium have
been around for a while. But
Aziz is building his battery
with benign chemicals that are
cheap and plentiful.
MICHAEL AZIZ: They're organic
molecules. They're made of
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
earth-abundant
elements like that, and they're
really very inexpensive.
MILES O'BRIEN: Rhubarb.
MICHAEL AZIZ: So, we noted in
our publication that the
molecule we're using is very,
very,
very close to one
that's in rhubarb.
MILES O'BRIEN: So what on earth
could be cheaper than a rhubarb
battery? Maybe one that runs
on air.
DANIELLE FONG, Founder,
LightSail: This is version one.
Version -- this is it. This is
version one. We -- the
technology, we're calling it,
regenerative air energy storage.
MILES O'BRIEN: Danielle Fong was
all of 20 when she is co-founded
a Berkeley, California,
startup called LightSail. Eight
years, and $70 million later,
the company has developed
a half-megawatt prototype system
that pumps air into a tank when
an intermittent power
source is in operation.
DANIELLE FONG: By the time it
gets to the end, it's at 200
atmospheres. So that's, in
units of pressure, 3,000 pounds
per square inch. It's really a
lot. When you want to
get the energy back, you have a
valve open. As the piston is
drawing back, the valve closes,
and then the air expands, and it
drives the piston, which drives
the crankshaft, which
drives a generator, which
produces AC power.
MILES O'BRIEN: LightSail is
developing lighter, cheaper
tanks made of composites to hold
the
highly compressed air. Up until
now, the stumbling block for
this idea has been managing the
heat. Air at high pressure
gets extremely hot.
LightSail's breakthrough idea?
Inject water droplets at the
perfect size into the
compression
cylinder to cool the air.
LightSail says it's possible to
store all the power required to
run an average American home for
a day, 30 kilowatt hours, in a
tank of compressed air
the size of a refrigerator.
DANIELLE FONG: There's more than
enough wind and more than enough
solar to handle everything
that we need. That's for sure.
But the important question is,
how do we, in parallel, build
wind and solar resources
along with energy storage, so
that there is the right amount
at every time? Right now,
I would argue there is sort of
like too much wind and solar,
and not enough storage.
MILES O'BRIEN: Not even close.
And the task is large. Bill
Gates estimates all the
batteries
that currently exist in the
world could power global
electrical consumption for 10
minutes.
DONALD SADOWAY: People know that
the battery is the missing
piece. Without a battery,
renewables
are incomplete.
MILES O'BRIEN: But rising global
demand for electricity, along
with rising concern about
climate change, may soon lead
researchers to the missing
puzzle piece, giving electricity
some shelf life.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Tehachapi,
California.
GWEN IFILL: Actor Bill Murray is
enjoying a renaissance. He has a
new Netflix comedy
special, and The New York Times
recently declared him a pop
culture icon.
It turns out Murray
is also a poet.
And, as special correspondent
Francesca Maxime reports, he's
found a home at New York City's
Poets House.
DAN AYKROYD, Actor: I
think we better split up.
HAROLD RAMIS, Actor: Good idea.
BILL MURRAY, Actor: Yes. We
can do more damage that way.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: This is the
Bill Murray we know, the actor,
the comedian, the one
who makes us laugh.
BILL MURRAY: He slimed me.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: But there's
also the Bill Murray we aren't
as familiar with, one who
trades comedic lines for lines
of poetry at a yearly benefit
for Poets House.
BILL MURRAY: "What the Mirror
Said" by Lucille Clifton.
"Listen, you a wonder. You a
city of a woman. You got a
geography of your own. Listen,
somebody
need a map to understand you.
Somebody need directions to move
around you."
I used to be able to look in the
mirror and see who's there. You
know, who's there? And,
sometimes, it's a reminder that
there's no one there at all.
There's not very much there.
And, sometimes, there's someone
that gives me confidence.
And I feel that that poem is
about someone who has an inner
-- you know, a self-confidence
that's bigger than -- that can't
be contained in the frame of a
mirror.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: Murray loves
poetry so much, he wants to
share some of that confidence
with poets, writers, and
readers. His support of Poets
House, a nonprofit library and
cultural
center in New York City, has
helped make classes and writing
workshops like this one
possible.
MAN: What we should be doing in
the poem is, like, thinking
about the way information is
released at every step of the
way throughout the poem. Now,
how do we do that?
FRANCESCA MAXIME: One way to do
that, according to Poets House
executive director Lee
Briccetti,
is having all kinds of poetry
available to read, for free,
under one roof.
LEE BRICCETTI, Executive
Director, Poets House: It is
really the national poetry
collection.
We have collected, for the last
25 years, absolutely
comprehensively. You can walk in
and have an experience that
almost doesn't exist anymore,
especially doesn't exist for
poetry.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: Poets House
sits along the waterfront in
Lower Manhattan, boasting a
60,000-volume public library,
exhibition space, reading room,
and children's room. Every year,
it collects and displays
hundreds of books from
publishers in its annual
showcase, which
assembles all American poetry
published in one year in one
place.
Still, some critics argue that
the location isn't gritty
enough.
LEE BRICCETTI: I have to say, we
were worried ourselves. And it's
more diverse. Our audiences
have tripled. This is an
affluent community. And so we
really worked hard at making
sure
that our doors are open to
everyone, that we really make
sure that there are free class
trips, and that we program in an
incredibly diverse way that
invites everyone in.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: While Poets
House offers many in-house
programs, others take place
out in the community. We went to
their Poetry Walk across
Brooklyn Bridge this summer,
which
is how Bill Murray first
encountered Poets House years
ago.
While the Poetry Walk has been
going on for 20 years, it keeps
getting bigger and bigger
every single year. This year,
hundreds of people came out in
order to hear Richard Blanco
recite Walt Whitman's
"Crossing Brooklyn Ferry."
RICHARD BLANCO, Poet: "We love
you. There is perfection in you
also. You furnish your
parts toward eternity. Great or
small, you furnish your parts
toward the soul."
FRANCESCA MAXIME: At Poets
House, Oscar-nominated and
Pulitzer Prize-winning
screenwriters and
poets rub elbows with everyday
visitors and fresh creative
writers like Aziza Barnes,
who learned about Poets
House from a friend.
AZIZA BARNES, Poet: I would
start coming here, and I would
always run into somebody I loved
here, like, no matter what. And
I was like, OK, I think this is
a rich place.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: Barnes became
a Poets House emerging fellow in
2015. The fellowship included
a stipend and writing workshops,
with some of the country's
leading poets serving as
mentors. There, she wrote the
poem entitled "Self-Portrait."
AZIZA BARNES: "Only the turn of
cement can arc black. I am blue
damage, mother-gut and
tower. Truth, we are all for
rent, red, lined systems. The
door out is green and full."
FRANCESCA MAXIME: What was it
like being an emerging fellow
with a bunch of other young
poets here at Poets House?
AZIZA BARNES: I think -- I think
that, especially in the class I
was in, there's, like, not
really that much of an interest
in ego, in like I'm a good poet
because I wrote the thing
that was published in the thing.
It was more like, I'm here to be
a student of this for the rest
of my life.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: Cultivating
that lifelong learning is just
what the Poets House co-founders
sought.
Stanley Kunitz, who was twice
poet laureate of the United
States, and arts administrator
Elizabeth Kray, had a vision.
LEE BRICCETTI: They felt that
poets were lonely in this
culture and needed a place to
gather,
to meet, to be nurtured.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: Like other
nonprofits, Poets House requires
public and private financial
support to keep its doors open.
AZIZA BARNES: A lot of the world
would like to make you believe
that the work you're doing
is not important, will not
change anything, particularly
the arts. But I think it's like
the only thing that survives
about culture for real. And,
like, people do need it.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: Including
Cornelius Eady, a poet,
professor, and co-founder of
Cave
Canem, a national organization
for African-American poets which
rented space from Poets House
years ago to provide those
writers with a safe place to
create art and build community.
CORNELIUS EADY, Co-Founder, Cave
Canem: Validation is really one
of things that's so incredibly
important and that Poets House
continuously sends out into the
world as a message, a great
big yes.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: What is
poetry to you, in a word?
BILL MURRAY: I think it just
gives me an opportunity to, you
know, hear some sort of voice of
the
soul. Sort of the soul of a
poet, it's all of our soul.
This one's by Billy Collins.
It's called "The Moon."
And if you wanted to follow this
example, tonight would be the
night to carry some tiny
creature outside and
introduce him to the moon.
FRANCESCA MAXIME: In New York,
I'm Francesca Maxime for the
"PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: And updating our top
story: The superintendent of
schools in Los Angeles has
announced that the city's 1,200
public schools will reopen
tomorrow. They were closed today
after officials reported an
e-mail threat of a terror attack
that triggered a daylong
search of all buildings, forcing
more than 640,000 students to
stay home. New York City
schools received the same
threat, but dismissed it as a
hoax.
On the "NewsHour" online:
Imagine being surrounded on all
sides by a 40-part chorus.
That's the
experience that Canadian artist
Janet Cardiff designed for an
audio installation at the
San Francisco Museum of Modern
Art. You can hear the piece
yourself on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, all eyes are on
Janet Yellen, as the Fed
considers the first interest
rate
hike in nearly a decade.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.